[OTHERWORLDLY SOUND EFFECTS]
JAY WEIDNER (VOICEOVER): Hi.
I'm Jay Weidner, and
welcome to "The Secrets
of Alchemy-- The Great
Cross and The End of Time."
Many people ask the
question, what is alchemy?
This primeval science appears
to be a mysterious affair
conducted by our ancestors.
It has been
disparaged by moderns,
and outlawed by both
church and state.
The answer to this question
is long and involved,
and this series will go a
long way in answering it.
The short answer is that
alchemy is a science that
watches and observes nature.
It attempts to answer the
many mysteries of nature
by understanding, first,
the source of nature,
and finally, the outcome
of natural processes.
In this program, we will
explore one of the greatest
alchemical secrets of
all-- the mystery of time,
and the cycle of the ages.
From Plato to Pythagoras,
from ancient Greece, Egypt,
and Mesopotamia, our ancestors
knew, wrote, and discussed
this mystery, which then flowed
into the underground streams
of esoteric Judaism,
Christianity, and Islam.
Unshackled by the
weight of modernity,
our ancestors
understood this mystery,
and applied it to
their daily lives.
My fondest hope is that
this program will help
to revive this understanding.
Not just to erase the fog and
mist that surrounds ourselves,
our ancestors, and our history,
but also to revive in all of us
the great hope and promise of
our destiny as human beings.
So join me as we journey to
ancient Egypt, Peru, alchemical
France, and many other
places, to discover
the mysteries of our past,
and the secrets of alchemy.
[WINDS BLOW]
The journey that would
change my entire life
began in Los Angeles in 1986.
One of the things that I
did for fun in Los Angeles,
when I lived there, I would
spend the weekends perusing
the various garage
sales that would
happen in the neighborhoods
around where I lived.
I did this mostly to find
odd volumes of books,
as I was a book collector.
One Saturday morning, I
discovered a garage sale
in North Hollywood.
An older gentleman had died,
and he'd left all of his books
for sale.
It was obvious that the
person running the garage sale
had no idea what these
books were really worth.
Paying the $1.00 asking
price for the books,
I took them home that day.
One of the books that I
found at that garage sale
was a book called "Mystery
of the Cathedrals,"
by an author with the
strange name of Fulcanelli.
This book, "Mystery
of the Cathedrals,"
became the first book that
I read out of the stack
of books I'd bought that day.
Thinking that the book was
about the architecture and art
of Gothic cathedrals,
I opened the book
up only to discover that,
instead of a book on art
and architecture, I
discovered that the book was
actually about that strange
science called alchemy.
I always thought
alchemy was practiced
by men in their basements,
crazed by mercury vapors,
trying to change lead into gold
in some vain attempt to get
rich quick.
But when I read this
book, I discovered
that alchemy was something far
different than I ever imagined.
What Fulcanelli was
saying in this book
was that the secret of
alchemy was engraved
and embedded in the
architecture and the art
of Gothic cathedrals.
The Gothic cathedrals were built
from about 1100 to about 1200,
in Europe.
500 cathedrals, approximately,
were built in around 100 years
to 150 years.
Each cathedral took 70,
80, 100 years to build.
Thousands of people
would work on them--
artisans and craftsmen,
carpenters, and masons,
building these cathedrals.
It was one of the
biggest building projects
ever in the history
of the world.
As big as the pyramids,
or maybe even bigger.
Not talked much about,
but these cathedrals
are some of the most stunning
displays of craftsmanship
ever in the entire history
of European culture.
Fulcanelli turns
the entire religion
around the Gothic
cathedrals, and turns it
into a science that looks
into the holistic aspects
of our existence, for
that is what alchemy is.
As opposed to science,
which breaks things down
into its smallest form,
alchemy looks at the whole,
and tries to bring
the whole down.
Science looks down into matter.
Alchemy looks up into spirit.
And alchemists believe that
life-- what we are here
on this planet-- is really
a wedding, or a marriage,
between the lower
forces of material
and the upper forces of spirit.
And that the human race,
and the human being,
is the ultimate construct
in this marriage
between these forces.
Fulcanelli is saying that the
Gothic cathedrals were built
by alchemists, and
he's telling us
that the cathedrals themselves
were alchemical experiments.
That the steeples
of the cathedrals
were drawing down
the forces of spirit.
That the well under
the cathedrals
was drawing up the material
forces of life-- Water.
Earth.
On the floor of the cathedral
these forces married,
and created a spiritual vortex.
There is no doubt.
Even historians such
as Daniel Boorstin
speak about how the building
of the Gothic cathedrals
was the transforming
moment in European history
when math, and a literary
sense, and where rationality
and common sense
became the paradigm
of the new culture that
was being created out
of the ruins of the Dark Age.
By 1991, after I'd moved to
Seattle from Los Angeles,
I became extremely curious
about the "Mysteries
of the Cathedrals," and
the secrets that it held.
In Seattle, there was a
library called the Seattle
Metaphysical Library.
I joined this
library, and I happily
discovered that
there were thousands
and thousands of books,
all on esoteric matters.
Spending the next few
years perusing the shelves,
searching for the mystery
behind Fulcanelli,
I uncovered many,
many salient facts
that would affect the
investigation as it went on.
In 1926, when "Mystery of
the Cathedrals" by Fulcanelli
was first published in Paris,
there was only 300 copies.
This went out to
the rich people,
and the book became
more of a rumor
than having anyone read it.
But the book was reprinted,
en masse, in 1957,
translated into English, and
then printed en masse in 1959.
This new edition of
"Mystery of the Cathedrals,"
contained a new chapter.
And this chapter was called
"The Cyclic Cross of Hendaye."
This fact turned my
attention towards
this new additional chapter.
So as I sat down in 1991
and read "The Cyclic Cross
of Hendaye," the penultimate
chapter in "Mystery
of the Cathedrals," I realized
that Fulcanelli had inserted
the chapter on purpose.
That 1926 was not the time for
that chapter to be released.
But 1957, some 30 years
later, was perfect.
And it was perfect
because "The Cyclic
Cross of Hendaye"
chapter describes
a most extraordinary event.
It is saying-- this cross that
is in a churchyard in the south
of France-- is saying that there
is going to be a catastrophe--
an apocalypse-- that
this age is going to end.
The cyclic cross of
Hendaye is a strange cross
that sits in a churchyard
in Hendaye, France.
Hendaye, France, sits at the
southwest corner of France,
right across the
border from Spain.
In the churchyard of
Saint Vincent's Cathedral
in Hendaye, France,
we find this strange
12-foot, obscure monument.
The cross stands
about 12 feet high.
It has a pedestal that sits
about three and 1/2 feet high.
There are four carved drawings
on the facade of the pedestal.
There's a star on the east side.
There's the fairy tale
moon on the north side.
There's the angry sun face,
with four six-pointed stars
on the west side.
And then there's
the odd oval shape
with a cross in the center,
with an odd looking A
in each of the quadrants.
Notice that the
odd-looking A has
the right angle crossbar, as
opposed to a straight crossbar.
This is interesting, as it is
the symbol for freemasonry,
and may be why Fulcanelli
tells us in the chapter
that the person who carved
the cross of Hendaye
was a Master Mason.
Sitting on top of the pedestal
is a six-foot Greek column
with 17 flutes.
And on top of the Greek
column is a Greek cross.
On the east side of the Greek
cross are the famous letters
that were above Jesus
as he was on the cross--
I-N-R-I-- which, in Latin,
means Jesus of Nazareth,
King of the Jews.
And on the other side is a Latin
inscription, pictured here.
This inscription, although
broken as it reads, and we'll
get into that later,
says, basically, in Latin,
"Hail, O Cross, the only hope."
So that's the cross of
Hendaye, not elegant enough
to be moved to the Louvre,
or the British Museum,
or the Metropolitan
Museum in New York.
So it sits here facing
the erosion of the sea,
and the cars rolling right by.
I predict the cross of
Hendaye will be completely
eroded in less than 50 years.
On the second page of his
chapter "The Cyclic Cross
of Hendaye," Fulcanelli
tells us this
about the cross of Hendaye.
"Whatever its age,
the Hendaye cross
shows by the decoration
of its pedestal
that it is the
strangest monument
of primitive
millenarism, the rarest
symbolical translation
of chiliasm,
which I have ever met."
To have someone with the
knowledge of Fulcanelli
telling us that this cross is
the rarest symbolic translation
of an ancient Gnostic
tradition called chiliasm,
is extremely important.
Chiliasm is a Gnostic
doctrine concerned
with the end of the world.
Fulcanelli is telling us
that this cross at Hendaye
is the rarest form of symbolical
meaning about our world
that he has ever seen.
And that was enough
to make me concentrate
on the cross of Hendaye.
Fulcanelli clearly
ignores many of the things
on the cross of Hendaye, and
concentrates his attention
to certain aspects of the cross.
At first, I couldn't
understand this.
Then I realized later that
what Fulcanelli was doing
was forcing the curious reader,
the reader who was paying
close attention to
what he was saying,
to go out and look
at the other things
that he does not
mention on the cross,
and understand what they mean.
And then come back
to him, and look
at what he is saying
about the cross,
and the particular aspects
that he points out.
And then the combination
of these two streams
of knowledge gathering
have the tendency
to initiate the reader.
It's actually a quite clever
way of getting the reader
to learn how to
think, which is one
of the main purposes of
"Mystery of the Cathedrals,"
and of alchemy.
One of the very first things
that he concentrates on
is the strange Latin inscription
that says, essentially,
or ostensibly, "Hail, O
Cross, the only hope."
SHARRON ROSE: "Certainly it
is easy to recognize the well
known phrase, "O crux
ave spes unica"--
Hail, O Cross, the only hope.
However, if we were to
translate it like a schoolboy,
we should not know the
purpose either of the base
or of the cross, and
we might be surprised
by such an invocation.
In reality, we should carry
carelessness and ignorance
to the pitch of disregarding
the elementary rules of grammar.
"The masculine word 'pes'
in the nominative requires
the adjective 'unicus,'
agreeing in gender,
and not the feminine form
'unica.' It would, therefore,
appear that the corruption
of the word 'spes'-- hope--
into 'pes'-- foot-- by
dropping the initial consonant,
must be the unintentional
result of a complete
lack of knowledge on the
part of our stone cutter.
But does inexperience really
justify such uncouthness?
"I cannot think so.
Indeed, a comparison
of the other motifs
carried out by the same
hand, and in the same manner,
shows evident care to reproduce
the normal positioning--
a care shown both in the
placing and in the balance
of the motifs.
Why should the inscription have
been treated less scrupulously?
A careful examination
of the latter
shows that the letters
are clear, if not elegant,
and do not overlap.
"No doubt our workman
traced them first
in chalk or charcoal,
and this rough draft
must rule out any
idea that a mistake
occurred during the actual
cutting of the letters.
However, since his
apparent mistake exists,
it follows that it must
really have been intended.
The only reason
that I can think of
is that it is a sign
put it on purpose,
concealed under the appearance
of an inexplicable blunder,
and intended to arouse the
curiosity of the observer.
"I will, therefore, state
that, in my opinion,
it was with knowledge and
intent that the author
arranged the inscription of
his puzzling work in this way."
JAY WEIDNER (VOICEOVER): What
Fulcanelli is telling us here
is that the stone
cutter, the person
who carved the inscription, the
Latin inscription on the cross,
made a mistake.
And this mistake would
be like carving the words
"The United States" in stone.
The mistake would be taking the
D off of the end of "United,"
and placing it at the
beginning of "States."
A completely ridiculous
mistake, and utterly untenable.
And Fulcanelli shows
us that it would
be impossible for
the stone cutter
to have drawn out the letters
and spent the hours doing that,
and then spent the
hours cutting the stone
without ever knowing that he
was making this big mistake.
And as Fulcanelli says,
this was a mistake
that was put here on purpose,
to alert the curious observer.
SHARRON ROSE: "The letter S,
which takes on the curving
shape of a snake,
corresponds to the Greek chi,
and takes over its
esoteric meaning.
It is the helicoidal
track of the sun,
having arrived at the
zenith of its curve
across space at the time
of the cyclic catastrophe.
It is a theoretical image of
the beast of the apocalypse.
Of the dragon which, on
the days of judgment,
spews out fire and brimstone
on Macrocosmic creation."
JAY WEIDNER
(VOICEOVER): Fulcanelli
then goes on to tell us
that he has translated
the Latin inscription.
By reading the
inscription in French
and taking each of the syllables
and using them as a word,
Fulcanelli comes up with this.
SHARRON ROSE: "It is written
that life takes refuge
in a single space, and we learn
that a country exists where
death cannot reach
man at the terrible
time of the double cataclysm.
As for the geographical
location of this promised land
from which the
elite will take part
in the return of the golden
age, it is up to us to find it."
JAY WEIDNER
(VOICEOVER): Fulcanelli
is saying here is that, while
he can translate the syllables
over to French and have it read
"it is written that life takes
refuge in a single space," he
is also telling us that there's
more to the inscription.
That the inscription
is naming a country--
a country where the double
cataclysm, as Fulcanelli
calls it, will not reach.
Fulcanelli gives us a
prescription for how
to break the Latin inscription.
As we will find out
later in this journey,
I use Fulcanelli's
prescription in this chapter
to break the code of
the Latin inscription
and reveal that, indeed, it
is talking about a country,
and a place, where the double
catastrophe will not reach.
After the inscription
part in the chapter,
Fulcanelli then
tells us about fixing
the pole of the
northern hemisphere,
and locating in time the
fatal period of the expiation.
He tells us that--
SHARRON ROSE: "It is this
which explains the inscription
I-N-R-I-- Jesus of
Nazareth, King of the Jews--
but which gives to the
cross its secret meaning.
Igne Natura Renovatur Integra.
By fire, nature
is renewed whole.
For it is by fire, and in
fire, that our hemisphere
will soon be tried.
And just as, by means of
fire, gold is separated
from impure metals,
so scripture says
the good will be
separated from the wicked
on the great Day of Judgment."
JAY WEIDNER (VOICEOVER):
Fulcanelli is telling us
that there's going to be
an end of the world, a Day
of Judgment, when the wicked
are separated from the good,
and the impure metals are
separated from the pure metals.
And this will be done by fire.
While skipping over the pedestal
and its drawings of the sun,
the moon, and the
star, Fulcanelli then
concentrates his chapter on the
oval with the strange four A's.
He tells us that it is
a complete hieroglyph
of the universe composed of the
conventional signs for Heaven
and Earth-- the spiritual,
the temporal, the macrocosm,
and the microcosm, in
which major emblems
of the redemption cross
and the world circle
are found in association.
SHARRON ROSE: "'And before the
throne,' writes Saint John,
'there was a sea of
glass like unto crystal.
And in the midst of the throne,
and round about the throne,
were four beasts full of
eyes before and behind.
And the first beast
was like a lion.
And the second
beast like a calf.
And the third beast
had the face as a man.
And the fourth beast was
like a flying eagle.'
"This agrees with
Ezekiel's version.
'And I looked, and behold,
a great cloud and a fire
enfolding itself.
And the brightness was about it.
And out of the midst thereof,
as the color of amber,
out of the midst of the fire,
also out of the midst thereof,
came the likeness of
four living creatures.
As for the likeness
of their faces,
they four had the face of a
man, and the face of a lion
on the right side.
And they four had the face
of an ox on the left side.
They four also had the face of
an eagle.' In Hindu mythology,
the four equal sectors
of the circle formed
by the cross were
the basis of a rather
strange mystical conception."
JAY WEIDNER (VOICEOVER): He then
finishes his chapter with this.
SHARRON ROSE: "The age
of iron has no other seal
than that of death.
Its hieroglyph is the skeleton,
bearing the attributes
of Saturn-- empty hourglass,
symbol of time run out,
and the scythe,
reproduced in the figure
seven, which is the number of
transformation, of destruction,
of annihilation.
The gospel of this
fatal age is the one
written under the
inspiration of Saint Matthew.
It is the gospel
according to science.
The last of all, but for us
the first, because it teaches
us that, save for a small
number of the elite,
we must all perish.
"For this reason the angel was
made the attribute of Saint
Matthew, because science, which
alone is capable of penetrating
the mystery of things, of
beings and their destiny,
can give man wings to raise
him to knowledge of the highest
truths, and finally, to God."
JAY WEIDNER
(VOICEOVER): Fulcanelli
ends the chapter "The
Cyclic Cross at Hendaye"
telling us that the
age of iron will end.
And that somehow, the gospel
of science, which he attributes
to Saint Matthew, is
how we can understand
the progression of cycles.
Well, it is interesting that
Matthew has the words "Matth"
at the beginning, and I believe
that Fulcanelli is pointing us
towards the science of numbers,
the science of mathematics,
and telling us that through
we can understand the nature
of the double catastrophe,
and the cycles of time.
One of the other things that
I discovered about this time,
in my research of
the cross of Hendaye,
was the strange coincidence
of the panels on the pedestal
and their relationship to the
tarot cards-- in particular,
four tarot cards.
Number 17 in the tarot
deck is the star.
And as shown here,
you can see that it's
an eight-pointed star, just
like the one at Hendaye.
Number 18 of the tarot
deck is the moon.
And again, just like at
Hendaye, we see a side profile
view of a fairy tale-type moon.
Number 19-- again, notice
we're in succession-- 17, 18,
19-- number 19 of the
tarot deck is the sun.
And again, notice the
sun face in this picture.
And notice there are 16
rays coming out of the sun,
just like there are 16 rays
coming out of the sun face
in the cross of Hendaye.
Number 20 is the
Day of Judgment.
We see that the angel in the Day
of Judgment is holding a cross
very similar to the
crossbar that is
inside the oval with
the quadrants containing
the four strange A's.
And so we see that there's
this odd relationship
between the pedestal
of the cross of Hendaye
and these four cards
of the tarot deck.
Interestingly enough, one of
the terms that Fulcanelli uses
to describe the four
A's is that they have
to do with the Day of Judgment.
Of course the Day of
Judgment is the fourth card,
and this is what the cross
of Hendaye is talking about.
Also, the two X's over the
Latin inscription on the cross
above are for the number 20.
Fulcanelli definitely,
in the chapter,
says that there's a
relationship between the two
X's and the odd
pedestal facade with
the oval with the four A's.
So we can rest assured that the
fourth side of the pedestal,
the side with the
four A's, is pointing
towards the Day of Judgment.
Four cycles of the Yugas, the
Golden Age, the Silver Age,
the Bronze Age,
and the Iron Age,
culminate in a Day of
Judgment-- the end of the world.
A catastrophe.
The Iron Age has no other
hieroglyph than that of death.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now that I had discovered
the tarot relationship
to the pictures on the
facade of the pedestal,
I moved up the column
towards the Greek cross
that sat at the top.
On one side of the Greek
column are the letters I-N-R-I.
These letters stand for
the Latin inscription Jesus
of Nazareth, King of the Jews.
But they also stand
for the Latin term
which means, in fire,
nature is renewed whole.
If one transliterated
the letters I-N-R-I
into their Hebrew equivalents,
and then did a cabalistic
analysis of those
letters, we'd find
something very interesting.
The four Hebrew words which
are associated with I-N-R-I,
I is yod, N is nun, R is
resh, and I is yod again.
The numerical equivalents
of those Hebrew letters
are, yod is 10, nun is 50, resh
is 200, and yod is 10 again.
When I added those up,
they added up to 270.
One of the things that I was
beginning to wonder about with
Fulcanelli's writings on
the cyclic cross of Hendaye
and what he was saying
about the cycles was,
it seemed to me that it was
very likely that the oval with
the four A's was really talking
about the 26,000-year long
procession of the equinoxes.
This is divided
up by astrologists
into 12 signs, or 12
months, of the great year.
Each of these 12
months is 2,160 years.
270 times eight equals 2,160.
Eight is a predominant number
within the architecture
and motifs of the
cross of Hendaye.
270 is a processional number.
Of course that
begs the question,
what is the procession
of the equinoxes?
Unbeknownst to most people,
the stars are not fixed.
While it might appear
that the same stars
rise at the same time every
year, this is actually not so.
The earth revolves
around the sun,
but its vertical axis is
not straight north-south.
The Earth is tilted
at 23 and 1/2 degrees.
This tilt is what
causes our seasons.
Just like a top wobbling
on the floor after it
begins to lose its
momentum as it spins,
the earth also has a wobble.
And this wobble
takes 26,000 years--
or actually 25,920
years-- for it
to go around once in the wobble.
This wobble is also
backwards, against the motion
of the night sky.
So the stars are not fixed.
And this was a great secret
to the esoteric scientists
of the ancient world
in Egypt and Greece,
and the alchemists of Europe.
For in this idea that the
stars were moving very slowly
and the equinoxes were
passing through each sign
of the zodiac, taking
2,160 years to pass
through each
zodiacal month, they
begin to understand that
there were great changes here
on the surface of the Earth as
the great zodiacal clock moved.
And so if we started our
zodiacal clock at 12,
and that was Aquarius, then
each one, two, three, four,
all the segments on
our clock would be each
of the 12 signs of the zodiac.
If we were starting at 12
o'clock, and that was Aquarius,
3 o'clock would be Taurus,
6 o'clock would be Leo,
and 9 o'clock would be Scorpio.
These are the four great signs
in the vision of Ezekiel,
and in John's apocalypse.
The four great signs--
the bull, the eagle,
which is Scorpio, the
lion, which is Leo,
and the human,
which is Aquarius--
the man, or the water carrier.
So the ancients placed
great significance
on these four quadrants.
And they seemed to point
out that when we pass
through the time period of
one of these four quadrants,
the changes here on the
Earth were much more
severe than in other times.
Indeed, when we look back 13,000
years ago at the age of Leo,
according to this time clock,
we see the great extinctions
of the woolly mammoth.
We see incredible
climatic changes.
When we look 6,500 years ago
at the age of Taurus, again,
we see great changes.
We see walled cities.
We see the city-states
first rising
up across Sumeria, and Northern
Africa, and in the Middle East.
There does seem to be some
historical linkage to this idea
that there were great
changes every time
that the great processional
clock passes through one
of these four quadrants.
And that's what
we're doing today.
We're passing through the
quadrant of Aquarius, which
is one of the four quadrants.
Fulcanelli seems
to be telling us
that the four ages
of the Yuga system,
and the four ages of alchemical
chronological time keeping,
are really based on this
idea of the procession
of the equinoxes.
One of the many things
that bothered me in 1994,
as the research continued, was
Fulcanelli's enigmatic phrase
from the chapter on Hendaye--
the double catastrophe.
Fulcanelli refers to
a double catastrophe
repeatedly in the chapter.
And I still, to
that day in 1994,
did not understand what he
meant by double catastrophe.
[WIND BLOWS]
I had discovered many
things about the other parts
of the cross.
The Latin inscription had
completely bedeviled me.
I knew that Fulcanelli was
telling us that it described
a country, or a place
of refuge, where
man could go at the time of
the terrible double cataclysm.
But I had no idea why the
workman who made the cross, why
he would take the S
from the bottom line
and move it to the
top line, creating
this jarring change
in the sentence, Hail,
O Cross, the only hope.
Not really understanding what
to do after spending many hours
working on it, I finally
drew the inscription out
on a piece of paper and
carried it around with me.
I would open up the
paper and I would
look at it in various
times when I was waiting,
and just stare at it.
One day, as I was
waiting for someone,
I laid the paper out
on the seat of my car,
and I began staring at it.
As I stared at it, I
realized that the central X
in the top word could be a
symbol for the cross itself.
I separated the X from
the surrounding words,
and I came up with
four words, as you
can see here in this diagram.
Split in this pattern, the
inscription looks like this.
From Fulcanelli's clues, we
know that the next step involves
exchanging K's, or a hard C
sound, for S. Our inscription
now looks like this.
This is not much better,
but we are making progress.
The next step is to
reciprocate the transformation,
and turn the X into an S.
Now we have a simple anagram.
Exchanging the R and the C
on the left side of the S,
and rearranging the right
side with a few simple
transpositions, and we have--
Then finally, I did the same
transposition of the top word
on the left side,
including the extra S,
and the meaning becomes clearer.
The four words spell out
Cusco, Peru, Cave, Inca.
Or Inca, Cave, Cusco, Peru.
Well, this is clear and
simple in several languages,
but there was another message.
When I uncovered this first
message that said Inca, Cave,
Cusco, Peru, I went back
into the Latin inscription
with renewed vigor.
I remembered that Fulcanelli
had talked about a single space.
A country being named where
life could find refuge.
And sure enough,
in this inscription
I'd found a country, Peru,
and it had been named.
What I did next was, I took
the top word, Ocruxaves,
and I displaced the S, according
to Fulcanelli's prescription.
I put the S at the
beginning of the word.
So now it read like this.
Now, we have three words read
outward from the central cross.
The first word is Ave. The
second word is the X, or cross.
And the third word
must be read backwards.
So instead of Socru, the
word now reads as Urcos.
The line now looks like
this-- Ave X Urcos.
Or, translating the Latin,
Hail (to the cross at) Urcos.
At first I didn't
understand what this meant.
I looked up Urcos, and
could find no reference
to it in the dictionary.
I then looked up the word
Urcos in my world atlas,
and found that,
unbelievable as it
may sound, 20 miles
away from Cusco, Peru,
is a town called Urcos.
Stunned by this
revelation, I realized
that I had actually uncovered
the truth of the inscription.
It matched exactly
Fulcanelli's description
of what the
inscription should say,
and I'd followed
his prescription
exactly, with the displaced
S and the hard C sounds.
At that point, I began a
massive research effort
into the history of Peru.
I went to the Seattle
Public Library
and checked out every book they
had on the history of Peru,
and began reading everything
I could about Peru.
That in itself is a
fascinating story.
One of the first things I
found-- I read the chronicle
of Felipe Guaman Poma de Ayala.
He was one of the
men who had traveled
with Pizarro on the first
expeditions to Peru from Spain.
Ayala had a drawing, and this
was the secret of the Incas.
And as you can see
from this drawing,
there is the sun, looking
just like, or very similar to,
the Hendaye sun.
There is a man in
a moon, looking
extremely close to the man in
the moon on the Hendaye cross.
There is the star,
exploding outwards.
And then finally,
the fourth one is
an A-shaped hill, with the
words, "The caves at parati
combo."
I also learned at this
time, going through the Peru
research, that there was this
incredible stories and legends
about a tunnel system,
constructed by humans
thousands of years ago, that ran
throughout the Andes Mountains.
Pizarro believed these
rumors, and thought
that the Inca had
hidden tons of gold
inside these caves and tunnels.
I was stunned by these rumors,
and believed that, if they were
true, these tunnels systems
could have been built
by an ancient race to
hide from some kind
of double catastrophe, of which
I still do not understand.
Once I broke the
Latin inscription,
everything else
followed quickly.
The struggle to understand
the cross of Hendaye
began to become easier.
Once I showed the breakdown
of the Latin inscription
and what it meant,
and how closely
it followed Fulcanelli's
prescription in the chapter,
people became excited,
and encouraged
me to go on with my work.
In the summer of 1996, I met
a man named Nick Fiorenza.
He had just written a
paper called "The Erection
of the Holy Cross."
He asked me to read
the article, and I did.
And when I did, I
realized that Nick
and several other
astrologers had
solved one of the major puzzles
of the cross of Hendaye.
What Nick and these other
astrologers had discovered,
the line of the galactic access,
the Scorpio to Taurus line,
would be at right
angles to the line
of the procession of
the equinoxes, which
are the Aquarius-Leo line.
They also discovered
that this cross only
happens every 13,000 years.
So the last time the great cross
occurred was 13,000 years ago.
What I realized in 1996,
when Nick Fiorenza showed me
his work, was that the
pedestal of the cross
was the point of
view from the Earth.
The sun, the moon, the
star, and the four A's,
this was the Earth.
And I realized that the cross
was the great cross that
happens every 13,000
years, and that this
was the outer event, taking
place outside the solar system.
Now I knew what the
cross stood for.
I understood that it was
discussing a relationship
between the great
cross in the sky
and what would happen in
our local solar system
neighborhood.
I also began to
understand at that time
why Ezekiel, in
the Old Testament,
was speaking about
the four great signs,
or symbols, of the zodiac.
Because when the
great cross appeared,
this would be the time
of the great apocalypse,
the great double cataclysm.
And this is what
John, in Revelation,
is also talking about.
And this may also be what
the return of the cross,
or the return of Jesus,
may be talking about.
I believe even
Jesus was possibly
warning of this
time in the future,
and that it was
necessary for men
to begin preparing for
the end of this time.
This great cross in the sky
was going to be happening
sometime in the future.
Now, this was 1996,
and the astrologers
weren't sure when the great
cross was going to happen.
Some said 1999.
Some said 2001.
Some said 2004.
There was a lot of slop
in the measurements,
and no one could quite tell.
Besides, the distance in a
26,000-year cycle is so vast
that 20 years is but a sliver.
And so, using ancient
manuscripts and symbols,
it is easy to see
why there might
be so much slop in all
of the measurements
taken about the great cross.
Either way, none
of the astrologers
could come up with
an exact time.
They came up with a season of
the great cross, which is what
I prefer to refer to it as.
In February of 1997,
I had the great honor
of going to France with my
soon-to-be wife, Sharron Rose.
Together we explored
the cross at Hendaye.
I measured it.
I was extremely thankful
that it truly did exist.
Sharron and I also
visited the Black Madonnas
at Le Puy and Toulouse.
We went to Chartres Cathedral.
We went to Notre Dame.
We used Fucanelli's book,
"Mystery of the Cathedrals,"
as our guide.
In May of 1997, I hosted
the second "Awakening Gaia"
conference in Boulder, Colorado.
One of the guests that I
invited to that conference
was the author of "Beyond the
Big Bang," Dr. Paul LaViolette.
And I sat down in
my chair and began
to watch Paul LaViolette's
lecture on his new book,
"Earth Under Fire."
By the time Dr. LaViolette
finished his lecture on "Earth
Under Fire," I was
limp in my chair.
First, Dr. LaViolette
talked about how
Sagittarius, the bowman,
and Scorpio, the scorpion,
were both pointing at
the center of the galaxy.
How the ancients must have
built the signs this way
to point at the
center of the galaxy.
Indeed, Sagittarius is
aiming his arrow right
at the center of the galaxy.
Dr. LaViolette then showed us
samples of ice core drillings
that he had taken
from Greenland.
These ice cores are
used by scientists
to be able to tell
atmospheric conditions
thousands of years ago.
As the ice never
melts-- it builds up,
year after year-- the
record stays intact.
What LaViolette found as he
looked down this deep ice core
drilling was that every
26,000 years or so,
there was a layer of iridium.
What this meant was
that every 26,000
years, iridium would blow
onto the surface of the Earth
somehow.
Iridium is a very rare
material on Earth.
There's plenty of
iridium found in space,
but very little found on Earth.
It's a very rare element.
LaViolette also found
rhodium in these deposits.
Rhodium is also a
deep space element.
This turned LaViolette
outwards, looking
for the cause of these iridium
layers every 26,000 years.
What he discovered
was the very basis
for understanding Fulcanelli's
enigmatic description,
the double catastrophe.
LaViolette looked
out into space,
and being an astrophysicist,
he realized that there were
strange objects in
space called quasars,
now called Seyfert galaxies.
What Carl Seyfert had discovered
was that what had previously
been known as quasars, which
were very bright spots of light
in the heavens, which
scientists referred
to originally as white holes,
as opposed to black holes.
What Carl Seyfert did was,
he took photographic plates
of these white
holes, or quasars,
and, using photographic
techniques,
he toned down the
light, so that he could
look deep inside the quasars.
When he did, he saw the
arms of spiral galaxies.
This made Seyfert think that
it was the center of the galaxy
that had actually exploded.
And the explosion was so bright,
so hot, and so extensive,
that it actually
overwhelmed and it
encompassed the entire
spiral galaxy itself.
Seyfert then looked
out into space,
and realized that 7%
to 12% of all galaxies
are in the active stage
of a Seyfert explosion.
He realized that all
galaxies go through
this cyclic transformation
of explosion and quiescence.
He realized that the
center of all galaxies
explodes periodically.
LaViolette took this
work by Carl Seyfert
and applied it to our
own Milky Way galaxy.
Thinking that possibly there had
been a past Seyfert explosion
from the center of our
own Milky Way galaxy,
he realized that might be the
reason why the ancients had
pointed the arrow of Sagittarius
and the tail of Scorpio
directly at the
center of the galaxy.
Like the sting of a
scorpion, the galaxy
stings us with its explosion.
LaViolette talks about the
explosion from the center
of the galaxy, and
how it would look
to us from our point of view.
He describes it as a bright,
blue star in the night sky.
He points out that the Hopi
have a legend that a blue star
appears at the end of time,
called Saquasohuh, or the Blue
Kachina, is a blue star
that shines in the sky,
and heralds the
end of the world.
LaViolette points out that
if the center of the galaxy
exploded, the synchrotron
radiation spewing forth
from the center of
the galaxy would
turn the light to a blue color.
So the center of the galaxy,
in its explosive state,
would appear as a very
bright blue star in the sky,
matching the Hopi
prophecies completely.
What LaViolette says is that
after the initial explosion
of the center of the galaxy,
a massive wave flows outwards
across the disk and the spiral
arms of the Milky Way galaxy,
shoving blots of dust containing
iridium and rhodium outwards,
towards the galactic edge.
Soon after we saw the blue
star, the pulse generated
by the explosion would hit.
When it hit, it would
cause crustal torque.
Earthquakes.
High winds.
[LOW RUMBLING SOUND]
Sometime after the pulse hits
would then come the dust.
This may take thousands
of years to hit.
But when the dust comes, it's
a huge cloud of cosmic dust--
of iridium and rhodium.
And when it enters
into the solar system,
the moon will turn blood red.
Also, the dust will
begin to fall down,
through the action of gravity,
onto the skin of the sun.
This will encase the
sun in the dust cloud.
Scientist call this
formation a T Tauri star.
What happens in a T Tauri star
is that so much cosmic dust
falls on the skin, surface,
of a star or a sun,
that it causes it to
heat up, like keeping
your oven on too long without
the heat being able to escape.
Eventually it gets so hot
that it flares outwards,
and huge solar flares
bake all of the planets
in the surrounding vicinity.
Interestingly enough, a NASA
scientist looking at flare
tracings taken from moon
rocks during the NASA Apollo
missions, and saw that the
last round of heavy activity
occurred about 13,000 years ago.
13,000 years ago
is also, of course,
the date for the
great extinctions
of the woolly mammoths,
the giant tree
sloths, the saber tooth tiger,
and thousands of other species.
This is in keeping with what
meteorologists have discovered
about the weather 13,000 years
ago, in which they describe
immense weather change, where
the temperatures of the Earth
were suddenly raised and
suddenly lowered in a very,
very quick period of time.
By the time the
lecture came to an end,
I was completely stunned.
LaViolette had described what
the star meant on the pedestal,
and what the angry sun meant.
The star was the explosion
from the center of the galaxy,
which looks like a blue star.
The sun was angry, because
the dust had enveloped it,
and its heat was increasing,
until it began exploding out,
just like the rays
shown in this engraving
on the pedestal of the cross.
Now I knew why the
Master Mason who
had built the cross of Hendaye
had placed the star opposite
on the pedestal to the sun.
Because the center of
the galaxy was the sun
behind the sun in occult lore.
It was the dark
sun of the occult.
It was the invisible sun.
It was the great dark goddess.
It was the Black Madonna.
It was Isis, the
mother of all things,
who bore our son as her son.
In February 1998, I finally
did get to go to Peru.
Cusco, which sits at the
apex of a great cross
according to the Incans, was
called the navel of the world.
Cusco itself is shaped
like a puma, which is
a South American mountain lion.
At the very tip of
the nose of the puma,
as you can see in
this drawing, you'll
see that the caves
of Sacsayhuaman
are at the very tip of
the nose of the puma.
When my Kitchwa guide
took me up into the caves
near Sacsayhuaman, I
discovered vast caves,
some that had been sealed
over, like this one,
by the Peruvian government,
to stop citizens
from getting lost in the
vast complex that runs
underneath the Andes Mountains.
Outside these caves, we
found heavily eroded effigies
and sculptures of monkeys,
and pumas, and snakes,
as if the outside of the caves
had once been a ritual center.
Perhaps it was a
symbol of the happiness
that the people felt
when they finally
escaped the caves at the
end of the last catastrophe.
After discovering the
Inca caves in Cusco, Peru,
I traveled southwards 20
miles, to the town of Urcos.
There, next to Lake Urcos, a
beautiful alpine mountain lake
in the Andes, I discovered
on an ancient promontory,
the cross of Urcos.
In perhaps the most
heartbreaking part
of this research, I discovered
that the old cross of Urcos
had been broken, and
a new cross had been
affixed to the old cross' base.
Not being able to follow
the trail any further
after rediscovering
the cross of Urcos,
I traveled to Tiahuanaco,
and the ruins just
over the Bolivian
border from Peru.
I found this stonework all
over the Cusco-Tiahuanaco area
of Peru and Bolivia.
In fact, the most astounding
amounts of stonework
and ancient ruins are in Peru.
Only Egypt rivals Peru
for its ancient monuments.
After getting back
from Peru in 1998,
I received an advance copy of
the book "Maya Cosmogenesis
2012," by John Major Jenkins.
John Major Jenkins
had discovered
that the center of the
galaxy was rising helically
on the winter solstice of 2012.
As I read John
Major Jenkins' book,
I realized that the last piece
of the puzzle had been solved.
What Jenkins had found
was that the great Mayan
calendar was going to run
out on December 21, 2012.
And that time would
come to an end.
And that this point
in time was marked
by the simultaneous rising of
the morning sun and the center
of the galaxy, in a direct
line with the Earth.
The marriage of Isis and Horus.
The great transmutative moment
would be in that second.
At that point, I knew in my
research that the Zep Tepi--
which translates to "the first
time"-- of ancient Egypt,
the construction of Shambala,
according to the Tibetans,
the Day of Judgment,
according to the Christians
and the Cabalists,
the end of time,
according to the Mayan calendar,
and the great transformation
of the human species, according
to the Peruvian shamans,
were all the same event.
And they were all
going to happen
within the time
period prescribed
by the cross of Hendaye.
I no longer believe
that any particular date
described that time period.
I believed it was more like
a season of the apocalypse.
The two X's on the cross
made me think that it must be
a 20-year cycle
that ended in 2012
and began in 1992--
strangely enough,
right when my research
really started.
As I reached these
conclusions in 1998,
I wasn't sure where to go with
them or what to do with them.
I had decided to write a
book about the findings,
but I wasn't sure if the
findings were true or not.
I knew that there was a
great cross in the sky,
and I knew that the Latin
inscription indicated Peru.
I knew that the two X's were
talking about the equinoxes, as
well as the number 20.
I knew that the pedestal was
talking about the tarot cards.
I knew that the star
and the sun were
describing a double cataclysm
of a galactic nature.
I realized that the
center of the galaxy
was the dark goddess, the
black light of heaven,
the single most
important place in
our local cosmic neighborhood.
I knew that the
inscription on the cross
was telling me about Peru,
and that it would be a place
to go when the time
of the great cross
and the great double
cataclysm occurred.
I knew that the Mayan
calendar was going to end.
But in 1998, these events
all seemed so far away
that I wasn't very concerned.
Now, I look back at
the last six years
since my discoveries
finally culminated,
and I realize several things.
One, that every
summer since 1992
is hotter than
the summer before.
That every summer since 1992 has
been the hottest summers ever
recorded in the history
of weather keeping,
which goes back some 500 years.
I realize that
the summer of 2003
was the hottest
summer ever recorded
in the northern hemisphere.
I remembered
Fulcanelli's admonition
that the northern hemisphere
would be tried by fire.
That this age would end by fire.
[OTHERWORLDLY SOUNDS]
The ancient science of alchemy
is more extensive and all
encompassing than just dealing
with the mystery of time,
and the great cycle of the ages.
But knowledge of time and
the turning of the four ages
is essential to
understanding how
human beings and other species
are created and changed.
What scientists call evolution
is really a cosmic process
that involves much more
than just genetic mutation
and spontaneous adaption.
Apparently the ages,
as they progress,
cause huge changes here on
the surface of the Earth.
This is a very important
subject to the ancient science
of philosophy and alchemy.
I would suggest
that evolution is
much more complex than our
modern biologists believe.
Perhaps the creation and
destruction of a species
is governed by the marriage,
the alchemical union
of both the forces of DNA and
the power of divine potential
that exists in each
and every one of us.
Perhaps both are
equally important
to this mysterious process.
This idea would go a long
way towards explaining
the sudden leaps in
species development.
The forces from above,
from spirit, if you will,
guided by the power
of light and time,
help to sculpt and
paint the newly
emerging species from below.
Just as the genetic map helps
to create its physical form,
so, too, does the spiritual
map help to create its soul,
or divine essence.
The alchemists would
say that nature
is much more than genetics.
Perhaps a higher,
more mysterious force
that we are only beginning to
understand, also drives it.
While ancient lore tells us
that the purpose of alchemy
is to change lead
into gold, this
is only a metaphor for
something far more important.
The real point of the
perennial tradition
is to take the lead
of the human body
and convert it to the golden
luminescence of the spirit.
Of the soul.
The photons that exist
inside our very DNA
may be the driving force
behind the alteration
of our genetic structure.
As we have seen,
as time changes,
the signs of the
zodiac also change.
And so, too, does the light
that reaches our eyes.
The quality of light
dictates the quality of time.
This knowledge was well
known to our ancestors,
and they lived as if their
lives depended upon it.
And indeed, it does.
The Cabalists tell us
that at the end of time
there is what is known as the
cocoon, or the restoration
of the world.
Through the performance
of right action,
holding to the truth,
integrity and compassion,
each individual assists in
the great spiritual effort
in which all opposites
are reunited,
and perfection is restored.
The sacred sparks of the
divine, the angelic powers
that have been weighted down
as the four ages progress,
are released and reunited
with the divine source.
The paradise that was lost
to Adam and Eve is restored.
Humanity's exile from
the Garden is over,
and a state of harmony and
perfection returns again.
I would like to emphasize that
our entering the current age
of Aquarius is really more of a
chronological marker than that
of entering a new age.
However, over the
next few years,
I would expect many
incredible and sudden changes
to occur as we enter into this
new and unexplored territory.
What will happen,
no one can tell.
This program is really
just an introduction
to the vast subject of alchemy.
In other programs,
I will detail many
of the other amazing secrets
and mysteries of alchemy.
I would like to
leave you with this.
The alchemical perennial
tradition is alive and well.
Inside the esotery or
secret confines of Judaism,
Christianity, Islam,
Buddhism, Hinduism,
and most of the
indigenous traditions,
lies the truth of
alchemy, and our coming
spiritual transformation.
In other upcoming
programs, I will attempt
to discuss and convey how
the processes of alchemy
works to unveil the mysteries
of our very existence.
How light can be
extracted from matter,
like plants and minerals, and
how we can absorb this light
and use it for our own
spiritual advancement.
While we may be very
close to the end of time,
we are not at the
end of our being.
For all of us are eternal,
born of a loving Creator,
endowed with the
endless possibility
for spiritual advancement,
whether in this world
or in another.
I'm Jay Weidner, and
thanks for watching
"The Secrets of Alchemy."
[MUSIC PLAYING]